{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf400
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c13333\c13333\c13333;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c13333\c13333\c13333;
}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs25\fsmilli12800 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Supplies:
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0 Sketchbook\
Mechanical pencil\
Bristol paper\
Printed template\
Light box\cf2 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\cf4 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0 Staedtler 01 \
Staedtler 03\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \cb3 Pentel brush pen\cf4 \cb3 \
Uniball white gel pen\
Eraser\cf2 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
1.) Sketching thumbnails of page: I usually sketch multiple thumbnails per page because my first solution often isn\'92t a very strong solution. It\'92s also better to figure out a concrete solution before hand so that you aren\'92t constantly adjusting to make a better page. \cb1 \
\
\cb3 2.) This can be done beforehand, but you need to transfer your printed copy of my template to the paper. To do this we use a light box which makes it easier the trace an image. Sandwich the template between the box and a sheet of bristol paper.\
\
3.) Now turn the box on and trace it using a pencil and ruler. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 4.) This is what it should look like. Notice how I don\'92t trace the circular shapes. I just have a general idea of where they go. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 5.) Pencil panel borders laid out in the sketch using the notches surrounding the template.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 6.) Next sketch your environments and characters with pencil. I use basic shapes to build them - knowing that I will add a lot of detail during the inking process. While penciling I am considering both my thumbnail and the overall grid system. I often make adjustments to my initial idea while doing the pencil drawing.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 7.) This is approximately what my final pencils would look like for my page. Not a lot of detail, but enough to remind me what my plans were for these drawings and to nail down the composition. For example, all of these fish will be covered in scales, but it would be a waste of time for me to pencil every scale since I will be inking them anyways. It\'92s like making myself draw it twice for no reason. It\'92s more important for me to nail down the overall gesture of the fish.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 8.) Next we start inking. I first start with the 01 \cf4 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0 Staedtler pen. I like these because they tend to take awhile to dry so I can ink for long periods of time. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 9) \cf4 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0 Next I use the 03 Staedtler pen to fill in smaller shadowed areas and draw a thick outer line. This helps separate the character from the background - after I ink the background also with an 01 pen.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 10) The larger black areas and the \'93alligator teeth\'94 shadows are both often illustrated with a Pentel brush pen. To fill in the black areas with a bit of texture I turn my pen sideways almost against the page and drag it perpendicular to itself. Areas that can\'92t be filled in this way I use the brush as I would any writing tool. \
\
To get the \cf4 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0  \'93alligator teeth\'94 I turn my pen sideways and press gradually harder as I pull my hand away from the tip of the pen. When these are stacked close to each other, the affect is a jagged edge. \cf2 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 11) I\'92ll now use my white gel pen to either cut into some of the black areas with highlights OR to clean up a mistake with my inking. I will also use white out tape or white out to do this. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 12.) Finally I erase the pencils and this is what it looks like.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0

\b \cf4 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0 To show how it gets wrapped up which I won\'92t go into detail because that should be left for yet another tutorial. 
\b0 \cf2 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0
\cf2 13.)  I scan the inks, clean them up and add panels. You might notice that I added some dock pilings in the background. After a bit of drawing. I\'92ll often use parts of previously drawn pages to save time or add complexity to a panel. This is more useful with the backgrounds than the characters. Sometimes repeating a character drawing can make the comic feel stale so I avoid it unless it contributes to the narrative. \
\
14.) Then I color the page. \
\
15.) Finally I add the type and word. bubbles digitally. \
}